====================
Calling System Calls
====================

There are two ways system calls are being called in the user space. Both of
them will eventually call the ``syscall`` instruction but ``glibc`` provides a
wrapper around that instruction using a function call.

*  ``glibc`` library call - this moves the arguments to the right registers before calling the ``syscall`` instruction.

*   ``syscall`` assembly instruction - to actually hand over the work to the kernel.

Glibc ``syscall()`` interface
=============================

*   There is a library function in ``glibc`` named as ``syscall``, you can read
    about it in the man pages by the command ``man 2 syscall``.

*   We already have the code of ``glibc`` with us.

*   See the function in the file
    ``glibc-2.23/sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/x86_64/syscall.S``

*   On reading the code you will see that the function is moving the argument
    values to the registers and then calling the assembly instruction ``syscall``.

*   As ``syscall`` here is a user space ``glibc`` library function, first the
    arguments will be in the registers used for calling user space functions. Once
    this is done, as the system call is being called, the arguments will be used
    into the registers where the kernel wishes to find the arguments. See :ref:`system_calls_args`

*   Code for ``syscall(2)`` library function. File is ``glibc-2.24/sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/x86_64/syscall.S``

.. note:: Remember the note above. As ``syscall`` is a function which we called
   in user space, the registers are different. We now need to pick and place
   the registers in a way that the system call understands it. This is shown in
   the code below.

.. literalinclude:: code_system_calls/07/syscall.S
    :linenos:
    :language: asm

``syscall`` assembly instruction
================================

We know now that for calling a system call we just need to set the right
arguments in the register and then call the ``syscall`` instruction.

Register ``%rax`` needs the ``system call number``. So where are the ``system
call numbers`` defined? Here we can see the ``glibc`` code to see the mapping
of the number and the system call. Or you can see this in a header file in the
system's include directory.

Let us see a excerpt from the file ``/usr/include/x86_64-linux-gnu/asm/unistd_64.h``

.. code-block:: c

    #define __NR_read   0
    #define __NR_write  1
    #define __NR_open   2
    #define __NR_close  3
    #define __NR_stat   4

Here you can see that the system calls have numbers associated with them.

Difference between ``syscall()`` glibc interface and ``syscall`` assembly instruction
=====================================================================================

In this section we will write some data to the ``STDOUT`` (terminal) using three methods.

*   First we will issue a ``write()`` system call.
*   Second we will use the ``syscall()`` function in glibc.
*   Third we will write assembly code and call the ``syscall`` instruction.

This will help us understand ``system calls`` in more detail.

Now armed with the knowledge of how to call system calls let us write some
assembly code where we call a system call.

``write()`` system call
------------------------

We will start by exploring the ``write`` system call a bit. In the
following code we will write ``hello world`` on the screen. We will not use
``printf`` for this, rather we will use ``1`` (the standard descriptor for
writing to the terminal) and ``write`` system call for it.

We need to do this so that we understand our assembly level program a bit better.

.. literalinclude:: code_system_calls/07/write.c
   :linenos:
   :language: c
   :caption:

You should go through the assembly code of the C file. Use command ``gcc -S
filename.c`` This will generate the assembly file with ``.s`` extension. If you
go through the assembly code you will see a call to ``write`` function. This
function is defined in the ``glibc``.


.. todo:: We should explain the assembly code generated above.

``syscall()`` function
-----------------------

Now we will do the same using the ``syscall`` interface which the ``glibc`` provides.

.. literalinclude:: code_system_calls/07/syscall_write.c
   :linenos:
   :language: c

Here is the assembly code for the above file. This is generated by using the ``gcc -S filename.c`` command. This generates a file with name as ``filename.s``

.. literalinclude:: code_system_calls/07/syscall_write.s
    :linenos:
    :language: asm

You can see how the arguments are been copied to the registers for calling the function ``syscall()``. This is being done so that in the ``syscall()`` function the arguments can be moved to the
right registers for calling the ``syscall`` instruction.

.. note:: When I am compiling the code I can see the assembly code only using the eax register and not rax, why?

.. todo:: We should explain the assembly code generated above.

``syscall`` instruction
------------------------

Now we will do the same in our assembly code. The idea here is to move the right values to the right registers
and then just call the ``syscall`` instruction. The same is achieved is by calling the ``syscall()`` function.

.. literalinclude:: code_system_calls/07/nasm_write/write.asm
   :linenos:
   :language: nasm

Makefile for assembling the code.

.. literalinclude:: code_system_calls/07/nasm_write/Makefile
   :linenos:
   :language: make

Run the make command and run the file ``elf.write``. You will see the output of your program on the screen.

::

    $ make
    nasm -felf64 write.asm  # Assemble the program.
    ld write.o -o elf.write 
    
    $ ./elf.write 
    Hello World


Conclusion
==========

In this chapter we saw the different ways of calling a system call. The three ways are 

*   to call the function directly like calling ``write`` directly. 
*   to call the ``glibc`` interface for calling system calls namely ``syscall()``
*   to directly call the ``syscall`` instruction from any assembly file.
